Once around Ganymede. Ganymede, the
largest moon in the solar system. One of
the four moons that orbits around the
planet Jupiter. And you can see the
little image that I took with a six-inch
reflector, I think it was a few years
ago, showing Jupiter just visible on the
planet are the cloud belts and then the
four Galilean moons laid out roughly in
the plane of the equator there. Two on
one side, two on the other. You should
be able to see that very easily with a
small telescope or even a decent pair of
binoculars.
Sometimes you don't see all four of them
because they can be either hiding in
eclipse behind the planet or perhaps
crossing off the face of the planet in
transit and we don't get to necessarily
recognize that. But if you watch with
enough knights, you'll soon see what's
going on, which is of course how they
were discovered by that man Galileo.
Here's a page from his notebook where he
recorded the positions changing from
night to night and realized that these
four little bright points of light were
in orbit around Jupiter, changing his
view of the structure of the solar
system, realizing that the Earth wasn't
the only center of the known world and
that some of these objects were orbiting
around other centers and therefore
considering that actually it was
entirely plausible possible that
Capernacus and his ideas of the sun
being the center of the solar system
made more sense.
So that was in 1610. In 1973,
this was the best image of Ganymede that
we had taken during the Pioneer 10
approach to Jupiter. um and it's really
quite blurry showing the the moon and a
little bit of color there but really not
showing very much detail. Nowadays, of
course, our probes are much better, much
uh better cameras and have been much
closer into uh all of these objects in
and around the Jupiter system. I said
this is the largest moon in the solar
system. It's considerably larger than
our moon and much more massive. round
about 3% of the mass of Earth and
actually larger than the planet Mercury.
So there's no doubt that if Ganymede was
in orbit around uh the sun, we might
call this a planet rather than calling
it a moon. Here are all the the sort of
major moons of the solar system to
scale. And you can see that it just
beats Kalisto. It just beats Titan,
which is the second largest that's in
orbit around Saturn. Um, and then we
have uh uh the others there with Triton
with our moon and so on and Earth to
scale.
Here's a nice closeup view of Ganymede,
third of the large moons in order from
the planet, bigger than Mercury. It's
got a few impact craters on the surface.
You can see those bright white marks
where fresh material, mostly ice, has
been brought to the surface by the
impact of space rocks upon it. Um, but
some strange flowing glacias
moving across the surface, rubbing out
older craters. So, it's not as covered
in craters as our moon, for example,
showing that this is a dynamic surface.
Um, here's uh some closeups of some of
those craters. And uh the different
regions are either more or less peppered
with craters depending on how old they
are. Young areas where recent activity
has obliterated. Older craters obviously
show fewer scars um and longer uh lived
areas where there's been no resurfacing
have accumulated more craters over time.
And we even see some crater chains there
at the bottom right where something
probably a comet came too close perhaps
to Jupiter and was shredded by the tidal
forces and then happened that all of the
fragments then landed on uh Ganymede one
after another creating that chain.
Now it's actually large enough and has a
nice solid metal core and is rotating
around of course uh in a period that is
such that it generates its own magnetic
field. The other moons of Jupiter tend
to get an induced field by orbiting
round inside Jupiter's very powerful
magnetic field. But Ganymede is large
enough to actually generate its own and
create quite substantial aurora
in and around it. You can see those
enhanced pictures there of the aurora in
the tenuous atmosphere of uh Ganymede
there. And actually the studies of the
magnetic field tell us how electrically
conducting the different layers of the
subsurface are on Ganymede. And this is
pointing towards the fact that this too
has quite a considerable subsurface
liquid water ocean underneath the crust
in the same way that we find at Europa.
So the interior is probably something
like this with the iron and iron sulfide
core in the center perhaps solid
followed by a higher viscosity liquid
layer and then a rocky layer less dense
so floating over the top in a
differentiated geological process where
the heat melts everything and things
that are more dense sink to the center.
And then perhaps uh a form of ice, ice
4, the uh tetraonal version of ice, the
pressure and temperature such that it uh
forms into a different form of ice than
the one we usually encounter, different
molecular organization. And then over
the top of that,
under lower pressure conditions, we have
the saltwater ocean. many salts
dissolved in it. Kept from freezing by
rising heat from the center and the
gradually reducing pressure allowing a
liquid to form and then exposed to the
surface and the uh cold outer space.
Then of course that water freezes into
an ordinary hexagonal form of ice that
we're much more familiar with and uh one
of two craters on the surface but a lot
of ice and some of those glacias
flowing. Now that heat is mostly induced
heat from the tidal ro uh forces of the
rotation of the three innermost moons as
they go around Jupiter interacting with
each other pushing them and shoving them
into slightly elliptical orbits and that
interaction between their rotation and
their orbit where they spin on their own
axis trying to keep one face towards
Jupiter at all times. like the Earth
does with the moon, but unable to do so
perfectly because the interaction with
the other moons causes the orbits to be
ellipses. This results in them getting
ahead or behind, and that tends to twist
and stretch the moons. Plus, they're
moving closer to Jupiter and further
away on their elliptical trajectories as
they go around, altering the tidal
forces. All of that adds up to
stretching and squeezing which heats
them. Io of course gets heated the most
because it's the closest then Europa but
Ganymede does get a significant amount
of heat induced within it. And of course
to some extent it's large enough to have
retained a bit of internal heat from its
formation and from any radioactive
isotopes that are in the process of
decaying within it. It's more massive
than our moon by a considerable margin
and so has got a little bit of residual
heat in there as well.
So it' be fascinating to be able to go
and land
a probe on Ganymede and uh be able to
study it in more detail. So far all
we've been able to achieve is flybys and
I hope we'll find out much more about it
in future. So, thanks very much for
listening and we'll see you on the next
one.